Christianity spread across continents.
Islam did too. But Hinduism, despite
being one of the world's oldest major
religions and shaping huge
civilizations, never became a majority
faith outside India, Nepal, and a
handful of nearby regions. Why is that?
A complex answer like this has multiple
layers. So, let's go through each one.
We should start with the basics. What is
Hinduism and why did it become dominant
in India in the first place? Hinduism
doesn't have a single start date. It has
its roots in the ancient beliefs that
came to northwestern India with the
Vadic people around 1,500 B.CEE. The
language of the Vadic religion Sanskrit
would remain the language of religion
and high culture in India for millennia.
And many of the gods and stories in
Hinduism came from Vadic beliefs.
Between 1,500 and 1,000 B.CEE, the Vadic
people expanded across large parts of
northern India, spreading eastward into
the Ganges region. Over time, it was
part conquest, part settlement, part
absorption into the peoples already
there. The vadic religion and texts went
with them creating a unique religious
culture across India. In the 6th century
BCE a combination of urbanization and
other political and social changes
caused the vadic religion to evolve too.
A shift towards personal morality over
public ritual. The growth of new
devotional and philosophical currents,
including ideas that would later
flourish in Bakti traditions and new
texts like the Upanishads, resulted in
key foundations for what we would today
recognize as later Hindu traditions.
This Hindu synthesis unfolded over the
late 1st millennium B.CE TE and the
early centuries CE at the same time as
and for many of the same reasons as the
birth of Buddhism and Janism in India as
well. These religions often coexisted,
overlapped in practice and debated each
other without always drawing hard either
or boundaries leading to an unusual
level of religious blending and
flexibility. But Hinduism is unique for
a few reasons. Firstly, there has never
been a single agreed upon doctrine. The
religion has no particular founder and
no central text. Hinduism is a diverse
family of many different beliefs. Some
Hindus worship Vishnu as the supreme
deity, others Shiva, others Shakti.
While texts like the Vadus and Bhagavad
Gita are held in high regard, there are
many other texts considered sacred and
many ways to interpret them. combined
with all sorts of local traditions and
even prehindu practices, you end up with
a religion that has very little in
common with the clearly defined belief
systems of the Abrahamic faiths. In
fact, these beliefs are so diverse that
Hinduism became a modern umbrella term
popularized by outsiders and especially
standardized in the colonial era to
categorize many related Indian
traditions under one name. So any
discussion of Hinduism has to
acknowledge that Hindu means a lot of
different things and many of the
communities we now call Hindu did not
describe themselves using that single
modern category until relatively
recently. Going forward, we'll keep our
definition of Hinduism broad then and
look for the spread of any of the wide
range of beliefs and traditions that
come under that category. the Sanskrit
cosmopoulos and Hindu Buddhist kingdoms.
So we've got Hinduism across all of
India thanks to the Vadic peoples and
the Hindu synthesis. Where does it
spread beyond that? Hinduism actually
had quite a lot of success beyond India
for a long time. From the start of the
first millennium and up to the early
modern period, Hinduism and other Indian
religions, especially Buddhism, could be
found all across Southeast Asia. It was
mostly spread not by conquest or by
large missionary institutions, but by
long-d distanceance exchange as India
became the primary influence on trade,
culture, religion, and politics in the
region. The key point is that this
spread followed roots not armies, ports,
merchant networks, royal courts and the
prestige of Indian learning. And because
it was mostly coastal, elite driven and
tied to status and statecraftraft.
Scholars call this system the Sanskrit
cosmopoulos. Indian high culture,
philosophy and politics which were still
mostly conducted in Sanskrit became the
ideal that rulers across the region
aspired to. You might think of it like
Latin in medieval Europe. Although the
general population spoke their own
languages and had their own cultures,
the elites were united by their
admiration for a common set of ideas,
stories, and philosophies in this
language. Naturally, the Hindu faith
contained within the great Sanskrit
texts took root among the people reading
them abroad. The elite Hindu Brahman
class became highly demanded advisers,
diplomats and scholars who could
increasingly be found at courts across
the region where they were high status
authorities and ritual specialists on
Sanskrit texts. We should also
acknowledge the role merchants played in
spreading Hinduism. As Indian merchants
became a regular fixture of southeastern
Asian ports, they often implanted small
Hindu communities that could encourage
surrounding people to convert as well.
Hinduism was especially useful for
rulers since it offered justifications
and guidelines for kingship.
Multiple kingdoms and empires emerged
who used Hindu beliefs to establish
their rule. The first millennium saw
this happen many times. The Finan and
Champa kingdoms in Vietnam, the Chenna
and Kamair in Cambodia, the Langasuka in
Thailand, and later the Buddhist
centered Sri Vijaya and Majapahit
empires in the islands that today make
up Indonesia along with many others.
Hinduism was often a major court
religion with rulers professing Hindu
beliefs taking Hindu names and raising
Hindu temples. For example, the Camair
Empire of Cambodia. The rulers were
mostly Hindu with names invoking Hindu
deities. They also built Hindu temples,
most famously Angor Watt. Hinduism was
useful to rulers like Surya Varmman III
because it offered justifications for
kingship based on religious sanctions.
Sanskrit literature was also full of
examples of good rulers that Camair
rulers could emulate. With royal
support, Hindu beliefs were entrenched
into Cambodian society with many elites
converting in order to be closer to the
king.
So Hinduism spread through India thanks
to the Vadic peoples and had a major
influence on Southeast Asia through
elite culture, royal ideology and trade
in the Sanskrit cosmopoulos. These were
its strengths and successes. So why did
it stop there? Where were its
limitations and where did it end up
going? Because for a religion to go
global, it usually needs an engine.
missionaries, empires or mass
institutions.
Hinduism's internal weaknesses.
Firstly, Hinduism generally does not
have a missionary tradition. Virtually
no Hindu beliefs call upon their
followers to spread the faith to others.
If anything, many Hindu traditions have
not treated conversion as a central goal
in the way other religions did. There is
no single join or be saved entry point
and spiritual liberation moka is usually
framed as something pursued through many
possible paths rather than a one-time
conversion into a single institution.
Hindus believe in karma and
reincarnation based upon past lives.
That worldview makes Hindu identity less
centered on urgent recruitment and more
on long-term spiritual practice and
community tradition. Also, empires have
often been the agents of this spread.
Rome spread Christianity to Europe.
European empires spread it to Africa and
the Americas. And the Islamic caliphates
brought Islam to people in North Africa
and Central Asia. Meanwhile, India had
no such expanding Hindu empires. Of the
many kingdoms and states of India, few
made any significant conquests beyond
the Indian subcontinent, notably the
Morans and the Chola, and neither of
them were very interested in conversion.
In the Morian case, many of the emperors
weren't even Hindu in the first place,
but Buddhist. As for the Chola, they
were more interested in ensuring smooth
trade with their imperial holdings
across the Bay of Bengal, not in
converting them. Meanwhile, the holy men
of Hinduism, the Brahman class, weren't
interested in missionary work either.
Not all Brahman left India and those who
did went directly to courts or estates
of Hindu nobles and rulers, not into
non-Hindu areas to make new converts.
Another reason Hinduism didn't spread
far is because as we mentioned there is
no single Hinduism. There is no single
scripture like the Bible or Quran that
can be used to pitch the faith. No
universal agreement on which deity is
supreme and countless practices and
traditions that can be widely different
from community to community. If Hinduism
did send out missionaries, almost every
missionary would end up having different
beliefs citing different texts and even
proclaiming different deities as
supreme. No core doctrine went hand in
hand with no central religious authority
in Hinduism to direct any sort of
conversion efforts. Temples are mostly
independent and there's no institutions
that can command authority over anything
more than a small fraction of Hindu
believers. Persian and Chinese
resistance. But that's not all. We also
need to look at the religions and
cultures around India that resisted the
spread of Hinduism. To the west, the
boundary was Persia. Persia's religion
of Zoroastrianism is often dated to
around the 1st millennium B.C.E. E
though its origins and the date of
Zoroastaster are debated. Unlike those
Indian religions, Zoroastrianism was
generally less open to religious
blending and was often closely bound to
imperial institutions. Backed by the
formidable power of multiple Persian
empires and boasting strong temple
institutions, a powerful priesthood and
a longstanding sacred text tradition
centered on the Avesta. It was a
completely different style of religion
to those of India. While Hindu traders
and travelers could be found in Persia
throughout its history and a small Hindu
trading minority was tolerated, Hinduism
never found a significant number of
converts there. The other great barrier
to the expansion of Hinduism was China.
China has always had a complicated
relationship with religion. Confucianism
and Taoism were wellestablished in the
country by the time the first inklings
of Hinduism arrived through traders and
travelers, but they might be better
described as ways of life and traditions
that are often treated as both
philosophies and religions. Hinduism
with its vivid mythology and tapestry of
gods was quite alien to Chinese culture.
Furthermore, with China experiencing
long periods of political stability,
economic prosperity, and cultural
dominance, the Chinese had no incentive
to convert to a foreign faith. If
anything, they expected foreigners to
take inspiration from their way of life.
China was a powerful influence on
surrounding regions like Korea, Japan,
and Vietnam, similar to how India
influenced the cultures in the Bay of
Bengal. and Hinduism struggled to gain
any foothold in most of these areas
where Chinese influence reigned. Cast
system and elite culture. There was also
the fact that the social system Hinduism
rested upon was difficult to transplant
out of India too. The Hindu cast system
often described through the varna ideal
but lived through many local jati
communities has been one of the defining
aspects of Indian society for thousands
of years. At the top are the brahinss,
the holy men and those with knowledge of
the scriptures. Below them are the
chatrias who are the warriors and
rulers. Below that are the visha for the
merchants and landowners and then the
sudras for the laboring masses. This
four varna system appears in Hindu
scriptures. But many communities were
historically treated as outside the
varna framework including groups later
called delits and outsiders were not
automatically integrated into it. This
cast system maintained social order but
it also made it extremely difficult for
Hindu beliefs to spread to new
societies. Cast was largely based on
lineage and it was difficult to
integrate new converts into any existing
varna. When it happened, it was usually
powerful rulers or elites being brought
into the Shatria cast or merchants into
the visa. For the vast majority of
regular people, however, there was
little prospect or appeal to being added
into the cast system. Social relations
between casts were tightly controlled,
and things like marriage or even sharing
a meal with someone from another cast
was often forbidden. Many non-Hindus
would find themselves losing certain
freedoms if they did submit to it, which
made Hinduism less appealing than
Buddhism and other religions, which did
not demand the same social control. Even
so, aspects of the cast system were
partially replicated in places like the
Kamur Empire, but it was never on the
scale it was in India. Existing social
systems remain strong and resistant to
Hindu reforms. There was also an issue
of social status and class differences.
Hinduism was more appealing to the
social elites thanks to the cast system.
But it also spread there more easily
thanks to the elite nature of Sanskrit
culture. Just like Latin, Sanskrit was
an elite language that the masses didn't
know how to speak, let alone read. The
common people's access to Hindu texts
was actually quite limited. As a result,
Sanskritic court centered Hindu
traditions were often less accessible
among the common people even in
officially Hindu kingdoms. But that
isn't to say that Indian religion didn't
find converts among the masses. On the
contrary, Indian religion thrived among
the common people.
However, the religion that succeeded
most and expanded more wasn't Hinduism,
but Buddhism. Buddhism went handinhand
with Hinduism across the Sanskrit
cosmopoulos. There were few purely Hindu
powers beyond India. It would be more
accurate to call them Hindu Buddhist
blending elements of both religions even
if the rulers and elites preferred one
over the other. Hinduism and Buddhism
were always accepting of other
religions. So it was normal for them to
coexist. Often Hindu Buddhist rulers
might alternate between the faiths in
the same dynasty and Hindu rulers were
happy to fund Buddhist temples just as
Buddhists funded Hindu ones. However,
Buddhism had some advantages which
allowed it to take root more
successfully than Hinduism in the long
run. Firstly, while Hinduism was closely
tied to the elites, Buddhism was more
effective at reaching the common people.
Traveling Buddhist monks and nuns were
much more effective at spreading
Buddhism to the common people than Hindu
holy men were. While wandering Hindu
aesthetics did exist, most of the
Brahman class who acted as Hindu
spiritual leaders mixed with high
society, not with common folk. The
simple practices of the Buddhists were
understandably more successful at making
new converts than the specialized ritual
knowledge and elite Sanskrit learning of
the Brahman sacred texts that few people
would ever have access to. Buddhism did
not have such a strict social system and
has no religious problems with adopting
new converts or reshaping social
relations in new communities. Buddhist
followers were less constrained by
hereditary status rules in religious
membership and converting to Buddhism
did not mean submitting to a restrictive
lower cast status as it did for
Hinduism. Something happened. The result
was that many of the Hindu Buddhist
kingdoms became more Buddhist over time.
Earlier rulers had found Hinduism and
its models of kingship more useful to
emulate. But when their people became
increasingly Buddhist, it encouraged
them to do the same, such as the Kamur
who changed the state religion from
Hinduism to Buddhism by the late 12th
and 13th century.
There were also some regions that
adopted Buddhism wholeheartedly early
on. Tibet is probably the best example
of this where Buddhism supplanted
existing indigenous belief systems
beginning under the Tibetan Empire in
the 7th century and becoming dominant
over the centuries that followed.
Tibetan Buddhism was greatly helped by
the rise of the Tibetan language
reducing the dependence upon Sanskrit
for religious and philosophical texts. A
similar process that scholars call
vernacularization
where written forms of local languages
like Thai and kamur emerged in the late
1st and early second millennium to
challenge Sanskrit's monopoly on
religion and culture occurred in many
places and went handinhand with a
reduction of Hindu dominance in these
societies.
And here China comes into the equation
again. Buddhism's more grounded and
philosophical focus was much more
acceptable to the Chinese.
Buddhism's focus on personal morality
and its lack of demanding social systems
made it easy to integrate into Chinese
society. Through China, Buddhism would
spread further to Korea and Japan in a
way that Hinduism simply never could.
The result was that by the 13th and 14th
centuries, Buddhism proved to be the
Indian religion with the most converts
beyond India with more kingdoms and
citystates professing it as a state
religion than Hinduism. To this day,
Buddhism remains widespread in East and
Southeast Asia in places where Hinduism
had all but vanished.
Islam had been a factor in South and
Southeast Asia pretty much since it
first emerged in the early 7th century.
The Muslim conquest of Persia ensured
that Muslim traders were a normal sight
in Indian and Southeast Asian ports. But
with the rise of Muslim dynasties in
Afghanistan in the 10th and 12th
century, Hinduism experienced its first
real loss to Islamic expansion.
Once the frontier of the Sanskrit
cosmopoulos and the western edge of the
Morian Empire, Afghanistan moved from
the Hindu world to the Islamic one.
Muslim conquest would lead to a retreat
of Hinduism in Bengal too after Muslim
Turk conquerors captured it in the 13th
century. They made Islam the official
religion and ruled continuously under a
succession of Muslim dynasties and then
the Mughal Empire until European
colonial rule.
India also faced a succession of Muslim
conquerors on its home turf. Part of
northwest India came under the control
of the Muslim Gaznavids in the 10th
century and the establishment of the
Delhi Sultenate brought Muslim rule to a
sizable part of the subcontinent. Later
the rise of the Mughals in the early
16th century brought much of India under
Muslim rule. At first the Mughals were
admirably tolerant of the existing
religions with Emperor Akbar hosting
multiffaith debates funding Hindu
temples and marrying Hindu wives.
However, this tolerance weakened under
some later rulers and periods of tension
and coercive policies emerged between
Muslim and Hindu communities.
As a result, Hindu groups often lacked a
strong unified political power that
could consistently protect or promote
their traditions.
In the glory days of the Sanskrit
cosmopoulos, Southeast Asian rulers had
flocked to Hinduism and Buddhism to
access high culture and legitimize their
rule.
With the Muslims now taking over parts
of India, Islam became the model to
emulate.
New citystates and kingdoms emerged who
professed Islamic ideas to attract trade
and improve relations with India's
powerful new rulers. Islam's growth in
Southeast Asia was driven heavily by
Indian ocean trade networks. Muslim
merchant communities, scholars, and
local rulers adopting Islam for
diplomacy, commerce, and legitimacy.
Muslim merchants had also been present
in South Asian trade for centuries in
numbers that steadily increased over
time.
Like Hindus and Buddhists, they promoted
the religion to the communities in the
port cities and within a few centuries,
mosques could be found in many major
ports from Vietnam to the Persian Gulf.
Unlike Buddhism and Hinduism, though,
Islam also had missionary impulse.
Muslims were encouraged to convert
others and the mosques spread across
these trade networks. Muslim merchants
built strong relationships with
non-Muslim ones and through these
relationships they encouraged leading
merchants and political figures to adopt
Islam.
While Muslim converts began appearing in
Southeast Asia as early as the late 7th
or early 8th centuries, it took until
the late 13th century for the first
Muslim power to emerge in Southeast Asia
with the wellattested sultenates like
Samudera Pasai in Sumatra.
From there, Islam spread along the trade
networks to countless other ports.
In the early 15th century, the
Sultanates of Malaa embraced Islam,
making arguably the most important state
in Southeast Asia a Muslim one. By 1500,
many of the major ports in Southeast
Asia were controlled by Muslims, and
conversion of the rest followed soon
after. By the 17th century, Islam had
become dominant across large parts of
the islands and ports of Southeast Asia.
The islands that today make up
Indonesia, which had once been a blend
of Hindu and Buddhist, became
predominantly Muslim.
Bali alone retained a distinct Hindu
dominated culture thanks to its relative
geographic isolation and its use as a
refuge for Hindus migrating there,
including later migrations from Java.
Conclusion. In summary, the reasons why
Hinduism exists almost entirely in India
today are clear. Hinduism generally did
not develop large sustained institutions
devoted to mass conversions abroad and
its expansion beyond India mostly
followed trade, courts and cultural
prestige rather than missionary
movements or conquest. It had no
interest in and was unable to gain a
mass foothold in Persia or China which
put a strong geographical limit on the
spread of Hinduism beyond Southeast
Asia. People across Southeast Asia
mostly converted to Hinduism for its
cultural power from the Sanskrit texts,
its political use as a ruling ideology
or to build relations with Hindu
merchants. When Southeast Asia began
developing its own literary cultures in
their own languages, it undermined the
incentive to be Hindu. Compared with
Hinduism's demanding cast system,
Buddhism proved more appealing to the
masses and was spread by active Buddhist
monks and nuns who brought Buddhism to
the people. Meanwhile, the rise of Islam
with its active conversion culture and
powerful supporting empires not only
took control of Hindu India but also
converted many of those Southeastern
Asian societies who had not already
abandoned Hinduism. By the late 19th
century, Hinduism survived almost
entirely in India on the island of Bali
and in a handful of smaller ethnic
communities like the Hindu Cham Balamon.
This video was very interesting to work
on. If you enjoyed it as much as we did,
hit the like button right now and click
the bell before you leave, so you don't
miss the next time we uncover history
mysteries. See you next time.
If you'd like to help us keep creating
and get early access to our videos,
behindthe-scenes content, and other
perks, consider becoming a member right
here on YouTube or joining us on
Patreon. Every bit of support helps. And
as always, thank you so much for
watching.